Once when Bao-chai called in to see her, the nature of her illness became the subject of their conversation.
‘I suppose the doctors in attendance on this family aren’t too bad as doctors go,’ said Bao-chai, ‘but the medicines they prescribe for you don’t seem to make you any better.
Don’t you think it’s time they called in someone really first-rate who could cure this sickness once and for all?
Every year all through the spring and summer you have this trouble; yet you’re not an old lady, and you’re not a little girl any longer.
You can’t go on in this way indefinitely.’ ‘It’s no good,’ said Dai-yu.
‘This illness will never go away completely.
Look what I’m like ordinarily, even when I’m not ill.’ Bao-chai nodded.
‘Exactly!
You know the old saying: “He that eats shall live”?
What you ordinarily eat, when you’re not ill, doesn’t seem to nourish you or build up your resistance.
That’s one of your troubles.’ Dai-yu sighed.
‘Life and death are as Heaven decrees; and rank and riches are as Heaven bestows them.
These things are not in human power to command.
I seem to be worse this year than I have been in previous years.’ She coughed several times while she was saying this.
‘I was looking the other day at that prescription of yours,’ said Bao-chai.
‘I should have said myself that there was too much cinnamon and ginseng in it.
I know they are supposed to build you up; but you don’t want to go overheating yourself.
If you ask me, I think the first, most important thing to do is to calm your liver and strengthen your stomach a bit.
If you could reduce the inflamed, over-active state of your liver so that it was no longer harming the earthy humour of your spleen, your stomach would begin functioning normally again and then the food you ate could begin to nourish you properly.
First thing every morning you ought to take an ounce of the best quality bird’s nest and five drams of sugar-candy and heat them up in a silver skillet until they make a sort of syrup.
If you were to take that regularly, it would do you more good than medicine.
There’s nothing like it for building you up if you have low vitality.’ Dai-yu sighed again.
‘You’re such a kind person,’ she said, ‘but I’ve got such a suspicious nature that in the past I always suspected that your kindness was a cloak for something and rejected it.
It wasn’t until the other day, when you told me off for reading forbidden books and offered me all that good advice, that I ever felt really grateful to you.
I realized then that I had all along been wrong about you – right from the very start.
I suddenly realized: I’m fifteen this year and have no brothers or sisters: ever since my mother died there has been no one – literally no one – who has ever spoken to me in that sort of way.
I’m not surprised Cousin Yun speaks so highly of you.
I used to hate it when I heard her praise your kindness, but since experiencing it myself, I know what she means.
If it had been you who’d said those things in the drinking game, I should have been quite merciless.
I should never have kept quiet about it at the time and gently remonstrated about it later, when we were alone together, as you did.
I knew from that that I had been wrong about you, and that you must really care for me.
If my eyes hadn’t been opened for me then, I should never be talking to you like this today.
‘Now about this bird’s nest syrup you want me to take.
I know bird’s nest is fairly easy to come by, but this illness of mine is something I suffer from every year because of my weak constitution.
There’s nothing particularly serious about it, it’s just something that I always get.
Yet already everyone’s put to a huge amount of inconvenience because of it, fetching doctors, brewing medicines, buying ginseng for me and Saigon cinnamon.
If I now come up with some fancy new idea like asking to have bird’s nest syrup made for me every day, then even though Grandmother and Aunt Wang and Cousin Feng may not say anything, the old nannies and maids on the staff are sure to resent the extra work.
Cousin Bao and Cousin Feng are Grandma’s favourites, yet you should see the looks these people give them sometimes – and you should hear the things they say about them behind their backs!
So you can imagine what they must be like about me.
I’m not even a proper member of the family: I’m just a refugee, with no family of my own, living here as a hanger-on.
That in itself is enough to make them resent me.
It’s difficult enough for me as it is, without deliberately thinking up new ways to make them hate me.’ ‘I’m just as much an outsider as you are,’ said Bao-chai.
‘There’s no comparison between us,’ said Dai-yu.
‘You’ve got your mother and your brother for a start.
You’ve got property and businesses.
You’ve still got land and a home of your own back in Nanking.
It’s true that as marriage-relations they allow you to live here free of charge, but you provide everything for yourselves apart from the accommodation.
You don’t cost them a penny.
And any time you feel like it, you can just get up and go.
I’ve got nothing at all of my own, absolutely nothing.
Yet everything they give me – food, clothing, pocket-money, even the flowers and trees in my garden – are the same as they give their own girls.
Can you wonder that the servants are so resentful?’ ‘Your being here only means one more dowry for them to find,’ said Bao-chai.
‘Surely so small an extra expense as that is hardly going to bother them?’ Dai-yu coloured.
‘I’ve been telling you my troubles because I thought you really cared, but you turn them into a joke.’ ‘Perhaps,’ said Bao-chai, smiling.
‘But it’s true, all the same.
However, don’t you worry: as long as I’m here, I promise to do my best to make it easier for you.
If you will promise always to let me know when anything is bothering you, I will promise to deal with it if it is in my power to do so.
I have a brother, it’s true; but you know as well as I do what he’s like.
It’s really only in having a mother that I can count myself a bit luckier than you.
In other respects we have enough in common to think of ourselves as fellow-sufferers.
If you can see this – as with your intelligence I am sure you must – you have no cause to go echoing Si-ma Niu’s complaint: “All men have brothers, only I have none.” Now, you have suggested that “the less trouble the better” ought to be your motto here, and I take your point.
I shall have a word with Mother next time I see her about this.
I’ll be surprised if we haven’t got some bird’s nest of our own at home.
If we have, I shall tell them to send you a few ounces, so that you can get your own maids to prepare it for you every morning.
That way will be handier for you and will also avoid the risk of any alarms and excursions with the staff.’ Dai-yu smiled at her gratefully.
‘It may be only a little thing, but it is very kind indeed of you to have thought of it.’ ‘Nonsense!’ said Bao-chai.
‘It’s not worth speaking of.
I’m only afraid that by spending so much time with other people I may have been neglecting you rather.
Well, I’d better be going now.
I’m afraid I’m tiring you.’ ‘Come again this evening and talk to me for a bit,’ said Dai-yu.
Bao-chai promised to do so and departed.
