After they had eaten their lunch, Bao-chai and the rest of the young people called once more on Grandmother Jia, to see how she was progressing.
On their way back, as they reached that point in the Garden where their paths separated, Bao-chai called Dai-yu over to her.
‘Frowner, come with me.
There’s something I want to talk to you about.’ Dai-yu followed her to Allspice Court.
When they were inside her room, Bao-chai sat down.
‘Well?’ she said to Dai-yu.
‘Aren’t you going to kneel down?
I am about to interrogate you.’ Dai-yu was mystified.
‘Poor Bao-chai!’ she said, laughing.
‘The girl’s gone off her head.
Interrogate me about what?’ ‘My dear, well-bred young lady!’ said Bao-chai.
‘My dear, sheltered young innocent!
What were those things I heard you saying yesterday?
Come now, the truth!’ Dai-yu, still mystified, continued to laugh.
She was beginning to feel somewhat uneasy, though she would not admit it.
‘What awful thing am I supposed to have said?
I expect you’re making it up, but you may as well tell me.’ ‘Still acting the innocent?’ said Bao-chai.
‘What were those things you said yesterday when we were playing that drinking game?
I couldn’t think where you could have got them from.’ Dai-yu cast her mind back and remembered, blushing, that the day before, when stumped for an answer, she had got through her turn by citing passages from The Return of the Soul and The Western Chamber.
She hugged Bao-chai imploringly.
‘Dear coz!
I really don’t know.
I just said them without thinking.
If you tell me not to, I promise not to say them again.’ ‘I really don’t know either,’ said Bao-chai.
‘I just thought they sounded rather interesting.
I thought perhaps you might be able to tell me what they were.’ ‘Dear coz!
Please don’t tell anyone about this.
I promise not to repeat such things again.’ Moved by the scarlet, shame-filled face and pitifully entreating voice, Bao-chai relented and did not pursue her questioning.
Having first drawn her down into a seat and handed her some tea, she began, very gently, to address her in the following manner: ‘What do you take me for?
I’m just as bad.
At seven or eight I used to be a real little terror.
Ours was reckoned to be rather a literary family.
My grandfather was a bibliophile, so the house we lived in was full of books.
We were a big family in those days.
All my boy cousins and girl cousins on my father’s side lived with us in the same house.
All of us younger people hated serious books but liked reading poetry and plays.
The boys had got lots and lots of plays: The Western Chamber, The Lute-player, A Hundred Yuan Plays – just about everything you could think of.
They used to read them behind our backs, and we girls used to read them behind theirs.
Eventually the grown-ups got to know about it and then there were beatings and lectures and burning of books – and that was the end of that.
‘So, you see, in the case of us girls it would probably be better for us if we never learned to read in the first place.
Even boys, if they gain no understanding from their reading, would do better not to read at all; and if that is true of boys, it certainly holds good for girls like you and me.
The little poetry-writing and calligraphy we indulge in is not really our proper business.
Come to that, it isn’t a boy’s proper business either.
A boy’s proper business is to read books in order to gain an understanding of things, so that when he grows up he can play his part in governing the country.
‘Not that one hears of that happening much nowadays.
Nowadays their reading seems to make them even worse than they were to start with.
And unfortunately it isn’t merely a case of their being led astray by what they read.
The books, too, are spoiled, by the false interpretations they put upon them.
They would do better to leave books alone and take up business or agriculture.
At least they wouldn’t do so much damage.
‘As for girls like you and me: spinning and sewing are our proper business.
What do we need to be able to read for?
But since we can read, let us confine ourselves to good, improving books; let us avoid like the plague those pernicious works of fiction, which so undermine the character that in the end it is past reclaiming.’ This lengthy homily had so chastened Dai-yu that she sat with head bowed low over her teacup and, though her heart consented, could only manage a weak little ‘yes’ by way of reply.
