All the young people – Bao-chai, Ying-chun, Tan-chun, Xi-chun, Li Wan, Xi-feng and her little girl and Caltrop, and all the maids from all the different apartments – were outside in the Garden enjoying themselves – all, that is, except Dai-yu, whose absence, beginning to be noticed, was first commented on by Ying-chun: ‘What’s happened to Cousin Lin ?
Lazy girl!
Surely she can’t still be in bed at this hour?’ 

Bao-chai volunteered to go and fetch her: ‘The rest of you wait here; I’ll go and rout her out for you,’ she said; and breaking away from the others, she made off in the direction of the Naiad’s House.
While she was on her way, she caught sight of Élégante and the eleven other little actresses, evidently on their way to join in the fun.
They came up and greeted her, and for a while she stood and chatted with them.
As she was leaving them, she turned back and pointed in the direction from which she had just come: ‘You’ll find the others somewhere over there,’ she said.
‘I’m on my way to get Miss Lin.
I’ll join the rest of you presently.’ She continued, by the circuitous route that the garden’s contours obliged her to take, on her way to the Naiad’s House.
Raising her eyes as she approached it, she suddenly became aware that the figure ahead of her just disappearing inside it was Bao-yu.
She stopped and lowered her eyes pensively again to the ground.
‘Bao-yu and Dai-yu have known each other since they were little,’ she reflected.
‘They are used to behaving uninhibitedly when they are alone together.
They don’t seem to care what they say to one another; and one is never quite sure what sort of mood one is going to find them in.
And Dai-yu, at the best of times, is always so touchy and suspicious.
If I go in now after him, he is sure to feel embarrassed and she is sure to start imagining things.
It would be better to go back without seeing her.’ Her mind made up, she turned round and began to retrace her steps, intending to go back to the other girls; but just at that moment she noticed two enormous turquoise-coloured butterflies a little way ahead of her, each as large as a child’s fan, fluttering and dancing on the breeze.
She watched them fascinated and thought she would like to play a game with them.
Taking a fan from inside her sleeve and holding it outspread in front of her, she followed them off the path and into the grass.
