Just at that moment the servants outside announced ‘Miss Lin’ and almost simultaneously Dai-yu came flouncing into the room.
Catching sight of Bao-yu she let out a wail of mock dismay.
‘Oh dear!
I have chosen a bad time to come!’ The others rose and invited her to be seated.
‘Why did you say that?’ Bao-chai asked her.
‘If I had known he was coming, I shouldn’t have come myself.’ ‘What exactly do you mean by that?’ ‘What do I mean by that?’ said Dai-yu.
‘I mean that if I only come when he does, then when I don’t come you won’t have any visitors.
Whereas if we space ourselves out so that he comes one day and I come the next, it will never get either too lonely or too noisy for you.
I shouldn’t have thought that needed much explaining.’ Observing that Dai-yu was wearing a greatcoat of red camlet over her dress, Bao-yu asked whether it was snowing outside.
‘It’s been snowing for some time,’ said one of the old women standing below the kang.
Bao-yu asked someone to go and fetch his winter cape.
‘You see!’ said Dai-yu.
‘When I come, he has to go!’ ‘Who said anything about going?’ said Bao-yu.
‘I just want them to have it ready for me.’ ‘It’s no time to go now, while it’s still snowing,’ said Bao-yu’s old nurse, Nannie Li.
‘Much better stay here and play with your cousins.
In any case, I think your Aunt Xue is getting tea ready for you.
I’ll send a maid to fetch your cape.
Shall I tell the boys outside they can go?’ Bao-yu nodded, and Nannie Li went outside and dismissed the pages.
…
Bao-yu had soon finished his third cup of wine and Nannie Li once more came forward to restrain him.
But Bao-yu, who was now warm and happy and in the midst of a hilarious conversation with his cousins, was naturally unwilling to stop, and pleaded humbly with the old lady for a reprieve.
‘Nannie darling, just two more cups and then I’ll stop!’ ‘You’d better look out,’ said Nannie Li.
‘Your father’s at home today.
He’ll be asking you about your lessons before you know where you are.’ At these words all Bao-yu’s happiness drained away.
Slowly he set down his cup and bowed his head in dejection.
‘Don’t spoil everyone’s enjoyment,’ said Dai-yu.
‘Even if Uncle does call for you, you can always say that Aunt Xue is keeping you.
I think that old Nannie of yours has had a cup too many and is looking for a bit of excitement at our expense.’ She gave him a gentle nudge to encourage a more valiant spirit in him, muttering, as she did so, ‘Take no notice of the old fool!
Let’s go on enjoying ourselves and not mind about her!’ Nannie Li knew only too well what Dai-yu was capable of.
‘Now Miss Lin,’ she said, ‘don’t you go taking his part!
If you encourage him he’s only too likely to do what you say!’ Dai-yu smiled dangerously.
‘Take his part?
Why should I want to encourage him?
You are over-cautious, my dear Nannie.
After all, Lady Jia often lets him drink; why should it matter if Mrs Xue lets him have a cup or two?
I suppose you think he can’t be trusted to drink here because Mrs Xue is not one of us?’ Nannie Li did not know whether to feel upset or amused.
‘Really, Miss Lin.
Some of the things you say cut sharper than a knife!’ Bao-chai could not suppress a giggle.
She pinched Dai-yu’s cheek playfully.
‘Really, Miss Frowner, the things you say!
One doesn’t know whether to grind one’s teeth or laugh!’ Aunt Xue laughed too.
